---
title: "My Mitacs Experience : Part 1"
date: 2023-08-22T11:30:03+00:00
# weight: 1
# aliases: ["/first"]
tags: ["mitacs", "experience"]
# series: ["Mitacs Experience"]
author: "Sathvik Joel"
# author: ["Me", "You"] # multiple authors
showToc: true
TocOpen: false
draft: false
hidemeta: false
comments: false
# description: "Desc Text."
canonicalURL: "https://canonical.url/to/page"
disableHLJS: true # to disable highlightjs
disableHLJS: false
hideSummary: false
searchHidden: true
ShowReadingTime: true
ShowPostNavLinks: true
ShowRssButtonInSectionTermList: true
UseHugoToc: true
math: true # needed for lated to render properly
cover:
    image: "kelwona.jpg" # image path/url
    alt: "Mitacs Experience Pt 1" # alt text
    caption: "Joel's Mitacs Experience Part 1" # display caption under cover
    relative: false # when using page bundles set this to true
    hidden: true # only hide on current single page
# editPost:
#     URL: "https://github.com/<path_to_repo>/content"
#     Text: "Suggest Changes" # edit text
#     appendFilePath: true # to append file path to Edit link
---

Welcome to my blog where I delve into my enriching experience as a Mitacs intern at the [University of British Columbia, Canada](https://ok.ubc.ca/). As an undergraduate scholar hailing from the esteemed [Indian Institute of Technology Madras (IITM)](https://www.iitm.ac.in/), my journey reflects not only personal growth but also the profound academic exchange facilitated by Mitacs. In this initial segment, the first of a two-part series, is dedicated to an in-depth exposition of the meticulous application process. Through elucidating crucial guidelines, I aim to streamline your application journey. Furthermore, I provide invaluable insights for navigating post-selection phases. 

## Background and Context 😀

Following my immersive corporate experience as a Machine Learning Software Engineer during the Summer of 2022, I found myself contemplating a new direction for my subsequent summer endeavor. Notwithstanding the value gained from my corporate exposure, an inclination towards delving into the realm of full-time research took root within me. This inclination led me to recall a conversation with a close friend[^1] engaged in a research internship in Canada. Upon seeking his counsel, my understanding of the Mitacs Internship program expanded significantly. His affirmative testimonial resonated profoundly, prompting me to embark on this path.

Indeed, the Mitacs Internship, as he articulated, “***is a canvas upon which one's proactive involvement paints the ultimate experience***”. The forthcoming sections will expound upon this sentiment. Thus, my journey commenced, fueled by a curiosity to immerse myself in the realm of research, further amplified by the endorsement of a trusted colleague.

## The Application Process 📝

Navigating through the Mitacs Internship application process necessitates meticulous attention to several key dates. While these dates might exhibit minor variations across academic years, the essence of the timeline remains consistent:

- September 21, 2022: Application Deadline
- November 14th, 2022: Interview
- December 7th, 2022: Selection Notification

Essential Application Components:

1. **Updated Resume/CV**: A current and comprehensive curriculum vitae is imperative for the application. Ensuring its accuracy and relevance is paramount.
2. **Academic Transcripts**: Gather up-to-date academic transcripts. Although this might entail some effort, these documents are vital prerequisites within the application.
3. **Letter of Academic Recommendations (LoRs)**: The most pivotal component of the application, LoRs, requires careful planning. The Mitacs application mandates at least one and a maximum of three LoRs. It's recommended to secure two recommendations for a well-rounded application.

### Insights into the LoR Section 📜

The LoR section can prove demanding due to the professors' potential commitments and time constraints. *Factor in that Mitacs will provide them with an upload link for the LoRs, which further contributes to the timeframe*. To optimize this process, **promptness is key**. Begin by approaching your professors early and promptly integrate their recommendations within the Mitacs application portal. *Underestimating this section's significance is unwise*.

### Selecting Appropriate Referees👨‍💼👩‍💼

Opting for the right referees is pivotal.

*  Professors acquainted with your work are ideal candidates. 
*  In cases where direct collaboration isn't prevalent, consider professors under whom you've excelled in courses. Although their recollection might be faint, providing context regarding exceptional performance in your email can aid their endorsement. 
*  Engaging in a degree of cold emailing could also yield positive results.

A strategic approach is advisable; *aim to secure at least two commendatory LoRs*.

Navigating the Mitacs Internship application requires meticulousness, efficient planning, and proactive engagement. By adhering to these guidelines, the endeavor becomes a streamlined process conducive to presenting a comprehensive and compelling application.

Upon successful completion and selection of your application, the subsequent steps unfold seamlessly, facilitated by Mitacs' comprehensive resource pool. Mitacs furnishes an array of invaluable resources to adeptly guide you through the ensuing phases of the internship journey.

## Bon Voyage 🛫

As you transition into the next phase of your journey, it's time to embark on the visa application process and secure your flight tickets. Having accrued recent travel experiences, I've learned that swiftness is paramount when it comes to both visa applications and flight bookings. Avoid procrastination and swiftly navigate through the visa application process, promptly addressing any inquiries that may arise.

If uncertainties linger during your visa application, make it a priority to resolve them efficiently. Drawing upon the guidance of program alumni or fellow applicants can be invaluable at this juncture. Similarly, when reserving flight tickets, act promptly. Flight prices tend to escalate as departure dates draw nearer. Given that Mitacs designates a fixed budget for airfare, early booking is advisable to optimize costs.

Furthermore, determining the commencement and conclusion dates of your internship is essential. Confirm these dates with your supervising professor before finalizing flight arrangements. Strive to achieve this step as expeditiously as possible. Aligning your internship timeline with the conclusion of your current academic semester is prudent, as Mitacs internships span 12 weeks, potentially overlapping with shorter university breaks. Ensuring that your flight follows promptly after your semester ends will help you manage potential class conflicts in the upcoming term. Swiftly securing flight reservations not only saves precious time but also contributes to substantial cost savings.

Prepare for your journey with meticulousness, and these proactive measures will pave the way for a seamless and financially prudent transition to your Mitacs internship.

## FAQ 🤔

1. **What is the stipend provided by MITACS, and how much can be saved from it?**

The stipend amount varies based on the country and is subject to annual changes. The potential for saving from the stipend largely depends on one's spending habits. MITACS offers a fixed stipend amount, leaving room for personal financial management. Early flight ticket bookings and opting for economical housing are a couple of strategies to potentially save money during the internship period.

2. **How to select and order the seven projects in the MITACS portal during the application process ?**

During the application process, consider several factors when choosing and ranking projects on the MITACS portal. First and foremost, relevance to your research field should guide your selections. Opt for projects that align closely with your academic background. Additionally, take into account the ranking of universities offering these projects. Prioritize projects from higher-ranked institutions to potentially enhance the overall impact of your internship. Investigate the research focus of the professors leading the projects and their respective labs for a more informed decision-making process.


[^1]: Special appreciation goes to [Vishnu Vinod](https://www.linkedin.com/in/vishnuvind/?originalSubdomain=in) for his invaluable insights and guidance throughout my journey. Your suggestions have been instrumental in shaping this experience. Thank you! 😀